Now in session.
So, um, what we are going to, um,
have the PC in, in here first for the first 20 minutes
roundabout, is Madagascar Red Walk, uh,
a petition from Ian Sizer in a growing concern for Northland
and the rest of New Zealand.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Look, we've got 20 minutes on this,
then we've got 40 minutes on, um, the LUC, um,
which is more of our work.
You've asked us three questions on Madagascar rework. Yes.
And we're gonna answer the three
questions as quickly as we can.
So you've got any questions.
Um, so you asked us what could be done
to prevent the spread suggestions of baseline data required
to monitor whether there's bigger system related issues.
So I've got two staff members, uh,
who are gonna do the first two questions,
and I'm gonna do the third one.
So the first one is online, it's James, Dr. James Newman.
Uh, and he's gonna answer your first question,
what could be done to prevent the spread?
Morning James Got itto.
Morning everyone. I hope you can hear me clearly.
Yes. Okay. Right.
You asked us what can be done
to prevent the spread of this plant?
And look, the short answer is, I really,
there's not much I can add
that you likely haven't heard already.
So I'm gonna be really brief
and cover a few general and specific points.
Ecologist talk about invasion curves
and point out how management options change depending on
how widespread and established a particular pest is.
So actual eradication is typically only an option when
things are just getting going within a specified area.
There is no record in New Zealand
of any terrestrial plant having been successfully eradicated
when the extent of spread has been greater than one hectare.
That's quite a sobering point to, to sort of sink in.
So eradication is, is not really an option for this species,
but maybe some subnational areas might be kept
free of the rag war.
And it may be that surveillance followed by rapid control
and small incursions of, of small incursions
to certain areas could be stopped the species from
establishing there and help limit or slow its spread.
So identifying natural barriers that slow the spread
and the key pathways that accelerate the spread
of the seeds could be valuable here.
But regardless of any efforts to limit it spread,
we're gonna have to learn to live, uh, to learn more about
how best to manage living with the species too.
Now, I understand you've seen the Bsis recent review
that mentions that bio controlled agents have been
considered and seeking this sort of solution makes sense
to me, as does further exploring various pasture management
options that might reduce the species spread
and its dominance.
And so I I hope that such work can be continued.
Now, one interesting point that you might have read is
that the plant is generally considered less toxic to sheep.
Uh, this was, I learned this myself and,
and BSI notes that overseas sheep
and even goats have been used to help control the plant.
But trials here indicate
that this approach is much, much less effective.
So I, I think understanding why this is,
seems like something worthy of, of further research too.
Now, um, BSI review mentions that MPI needs to be able
to communicate any research
or management finds findings directly to the affected areas.
And I, I'd agree and it suggests
that such actions require coordination from the top.
So finally,
and my brief little summary here,
there's also the sobering point that this plant is just one
of a long list of naturalized plants
and pest plants in New Zealand.
And the top of the north is already a hotspot for weeds.
We know that approximately 20 new exotic plants jumped the
fence and naturalized each year mostly from gardens.
So there is a steadily increasing list
of pest plants we are going to have to deal with.
So moving forward information is gonna be key.
And, and this is where I, I will thank you
and pass on to Anna who will answer your next question.
Thanks, Jess. So our robust information is vital,
and this lies at the heart of the second question
that you have posed to us.
One, about the baseline data required to monitor the spread
of Madagascar redwood.
So in a nutshell, if the goal is to prevent
or perhaps slow the spread of Madagascar redwood,
then having adequate information on the plant's current
location and the rate of spread is vital,
and an up to date distribution map
of Madagascar redwood is a good place to start.
As you would have left heard already from a research on our
BSI, uh, that need
for a distribution map has been raised several times,
but there are several problems.
So it might seem like an easy task,
but one of the complicating factors is essentially the
challenge of distinguishing Madagascar redwood from, uh,
gravel ground cell, which is another, um,
exotic plant from the same genius es
and they look very similar.
More so that even photos
of plants are sometimes not good enough
to differentiate between the two.
But in terms of a distribution map, one good place to start,
uh, could be publicly reported observations
of Madagascar redwood, or on the website are nist.
And as of history, the who 43 recorded observations
of Madagascar, redwood
and all are in the top part of Northland.
But the issue is that the map
of these publicly reported observations can be really
treated as a comprehensive distribution map.
And this is because the well parent enthusi, it is great
to have the citizen scientists,
but they generally record the observations closer to
where they live
and where they work instead
of maybe following a more comprehensive grid like some
research methods might do.
And what this means that there might be areas where, uh,
no observations of Madagascar have been reported,
but it might be the, the case of not
that weed being truly absent from those areas,
but more of the fact that no one went searching
for this swed in the areas.
So given these challenges,
but against the backdrop of really the need
for a distribution map, uh,
you could consider approaching again, NPI
and North on Regional Council
and asking them for a better distribution map.
Not just those publicly available
publicly recorded observations,
but more broadly that adequate information on mad gas
redwood should be part of the good data system
and what a good data system looks like in the context
of broader we management has been described in the space in
WAY report, but in the context of, uh,
monitoring the spread of Madagascar Redwood, uh,
four things are key.
So first is robust data on with location,
and that again includes the locations
where the weed has been looked for and found,
and locations where the we has been looked for
but has not been found.
Second is the data on the stage of invasion.
Essentially that means knowing
how widespread is the weed currently,
how much further it can spread,
and what habitats are likely to be suitable.
And from what we know to date from the modeling time,
the vast majority of New Zealand habitats,
especially in the North Island, are considered favorable
or suitable for Madagascar Agri War.
That map is in the research report,
but the third, the data on spread over time.
In other words, this means that the rate of spread,
how quickly it has been spreading,
and the fourth information on natural geographic varies,
or the areas of some defensible geography that could slow
or contain the spread of the reader.
In summary, you really need the data on the current location
and the rate of spread over time
and a good robust, uh,
distribution map could be a good place to start.
But I will now pass over to Simon to talk more about, uh,
several, um, systemic issues
that are relevant in the case. Okay,
Good. Thank you both for
keeping that brief.
I'll try and keep brief. So we've got time for questions.
The third question was,
are there bigger system related issues in relation to
how this we got here?
Um, and here I draw your attention back to the report
that I produced called Space Invaders.
Who, who hasn't ever picked it up or had a read.
Can I ask you that? I have read it. Yeah.
You all, you've all read it, you've all looked at it, right?
You haven't, it's all right.
I mean, it just, 'cause if you haven't do have a look.
It's not the most boring report I've written.
It's actually, it's actually quite, it's quite interesting.
It's sales pitch. Yeah, no, just a sales pitch.
But look, the most boring here.
Here's some of the things which we recommended,
which are t in this situation, we said
that there was scattered
and patchy information on exotic weeds.
There is no up to date
and authoritative list
of all plant species growing in New Zealand.
Now, you would think for one of the weediest countries in
the world, uh, you,
that would be something at which
we'd have got round to doing.
I recommended developing
and maintaining a single authoritative
and publicly accessible database of all exotic plants.
And I also said, uh, we could make some progress
by integrating the existing data that we've got.
And it's scattered around a lot of different institutions
and developing a one stop shop portal.
Now, I can tell you that the,
that MPI has made some progress on that second one,
it has actually set up a pests portal.
It's called an established pest portal,
but I think it's a good start.
But all they've done, I say all, you know,
there's been some work in this,
but they've just pulled together the information
that happens to be out there.
No one's actually at this point saying,
we need a single author list.
We're clear out the, the, the, the duplications
or whatever will have a single list you can refer to.
So there's big gaps in what's there.
Those gaps need to be filled.
Second thing there is patchy monitoring and surveillance.
And I mean, when Anna's saying to you, here's, you know,
43 on, on iNaturalist, but there's all of these gaps in it.
Uh, we tend to collect information
where somebody happens to be.
One of the classics in the report I wrote was, was
that the Golden Bay biosecurity officer who just happened
to notice some pink rag word in some pots in somebody's
house driving past one morning.
Uh, and it was the first time that it got into that part
of New Zealand turned out they came on a container from
Wellington when somebody moved houses.
Great to have found it.
But I mean, if you're relying on just charts, um,
you really aren't running a serious surveillance system.
So that's one of the things, uh, that we need.
Um, uh, in the case of Madagascar rag, uh,
it's apparently been here for, for quite some time,
but it wasn't actually identified till 2022.
And then there was this confusion as
to whether it was gravel grounds solar
or whether it was so, so time's been lost.
We, we haven't got a systematic approach to surveillance.
Um, thirdly, there are, there are taxonomic issues, stuff
around names and getting it right,
you need expert people to do that.
Uh, as Anna says, these two, you know,
AI can't actually distinguish the images
between the two parts.
There is a lot of us, you need expertise, uh, in taxonomy
and bio systematics.
We are short on those skills.
Um, I'd have to say the science reforms underway, big test
for me is whether the government can guarantee
that it's gonna keep the skill sets we've got.
Uh, because this is a long game
and you know, you, you,
you don't get up there on the front business pages on,
you've made the biggest breakthrough.
But for the country, these skills are just vital for rural
and, and agricultural New Zealand.
Um, we don't have a forward looking scanning
for emerging weeds.
That 20 Anna, I mentioned that 20
or James, I think 20 plants a year jump into the wild
from cultivation.
You know, so there's a huge pipeline.
We've got thousands and thousands and thousands of plants.
And sometimes they don't activate in year one.
They may, they may sit for 20 years, they may sit
for half a century that suddenly something
changes and they're off.
So we really have to have a, a more proactive view about
how we scan, we triage and assess those new naturalizations.
So we got an idea. They won't all be a disaster of those 20.
Only one might actually cause a problem.
But again, you have to be proactive about it.
Next point, you know,
this climate change is gonna change this right now the north
of New Zealand, and particularly
Northland's, the Weediest place.
And it's a climate which can, can look
after a whole lot of plants that
that wouldn't be too cold for the South.
That's gonna change. So they're gonna be coming, uh, south.
Um, uh, BSI has done some modeling, which shows
that the vast majority of New Zealand is considered
to be favorable a habitat for, uh, for,
for this, for this pink one.
Is that right? Madagascar? For the Madagascar, yeah.
Yeah, yeah. Uh, finally I'd say this,
I think leadership from the center could be improved.
The, the, the fact of these
new Zealand's MPI does a very good job,
I think at pre-order and border control.
And you'd expect that to be our investment.
We've already got enough of these things here.
Keeping more out is absolutely vital.
So I haven't got any disagreement with
where they've got the bulk of their investment.
But the director general of MPI is actually responsible
for overall leadership for biosecurity.
And, but when it comes to stuff which is already here, like,
uh, the Madagascar rework responsibility gets passed on
to others, uh, to, to, to do this regional
Councils and what have You. That's
right. Yeah. And regional councils, um,
play a crucial role at present.
And if we were to lose regional councils, you really have
to rethink this all altogether.
I mean, you might even think about taking
something back to the center.
Nobody told the plants
that there were regional council boundaries.
Um, so they're gonna keep moving.
Anyhow, someone's gotta think this through very carefully.
And whenever I've raised the point, I've been fobbed off
with, oh, don't worry, this is being taken care of in terms
of the review of the biosecurity Act.
It's not just about the biosecurity act,
it's about the institutions
and it's about the way MPI, uh, is doing this.
So I just say to this committee, you wanna have a,
a careful think, I think about
how biosecurity is gonna be handled, uh, going forward.
It has to be, it has to be at least at regional level.
If it starts getting broken up between even smaller units,
it will be even more tricky.
And, and so just to make the point that when it comes
to something like, uh,
the Madagascar rework up there in the north, uh, this is
where an organization like MPI can be very useful in helping
provide the coordination.
Just imagine how difficult it would be if the northern
and regional council wasn't one regional council,
but you had say four unitary authorities up there.
Um, you then got a four-way coordination problem.
So these are the practical issues I
think you've got to be thinking about.
Anyhow, those are our three answers
and I think we've probably sourced salvage five
minutes for questions on this one,
Mike. Yeah.
Um, thanks Miles.
Um, yeah, I just had some, just some observations really.
And it's, I think, um, um, James
and Jess probably reiterated as well.
What struck me when we had the guys come in
and talk about it was just the complete lack of awareness.
Yeah. The petition, the guy talked about, out
of a hundred farmers interviewed, three to six
of them actually had heard of it.
Right. And these are locals. Yep.
And, um, just complete lack of awareness.
And then that feeds into lack
of stakeholder engagement and all the rest of it.
Yet 35% reduction on LandCorp farms over seven years.
That's pretty significant. Yeah. Very significant.
And then we've got stock moving back and forth. Mm-hmm.
Yeah. And it's like, you know, so it's not just the,
the locals knowing about it,
it's actually the people that are buying the stock.
That's right. Um, you know,
and we've all got instances
where go some stuff coming on the back of a dozer
or a digger or something like that,
that's the other seed gets moved out.
Um, so I mean, I think that's probably the thing I got out
of it is the complete lack of awareness.
Yeah. And, and just on that, I mean,
I dunno about you on my property, I'm, I'm using, um,
something called, uh, a, what's it called?
Terro Species Identifier.
Identifier, which is an app, uh, which has been put together
by three two of the universities.
Um, and you pick, um, you, you, you, you photograph it
and it gives you a probability it's got it right.
And I've, I've just, I've got all sorts of weeds on my farm
and I'm wanting to know what they are.
And, and often, you know, you'll be lucky, you'll get a,
a 0.9 probability that it's identified,
but then you get a 0.3 and then you get an unknown
and you take multiple photographs
and then you get different names.
Now this is all just a matter of, of AI training,
but if we had a more concerted effort
to get the lists right,
and to then feed the information into these machines,
we could greatly improve our ability so that farmers
actually, when you say three out of a hundred, if all
of them had the app and all
of them could get easy identification, suddenly
that 43 points that, that, that
and observation suddenly that would run to, to hundreds.
I had a guy out at my farm from Waco University
who went round taking a photo of every a p***y wallow trunk.
And I said, what are you doing? He said, oh,
there's a thing that lives on them.
And he said, I'm trying to get the largest number
of data points in New Zealand.
So there's a bit of competition there, people doing that.
But that's, that's where the world's going.
And we need a a a a biosecurity system,
which is actually mobilizing that stuff.
But you've gotta have accurate information.
It's not just information, it's accurate information.
And, and just up on that.
And I guess that then the real benefit is if that,
if you could log those species
so they're actually recording some
Yes, exactly. 'cause that's
how you measure the spread. Yes.
You know, where they are, location, et cetera, et
Cetera. Yeah. I've just had
a sprayer in who's sending me the GPS
points of, of a plant called, um, green Goddess,
which is awful to get rid of from wetlands.
And they're all gp. They're all gps.
So, so I know where to go back to now and follow up myself,
but I mean the, it's again,
I think we need a biosecurity system,
which gives a bit more support in terms
of the base information and the data
and the data architecture.
And you all know I've been talking about
this for eight years now.
Environmental information is way
behind where it needs to be.
Yep. Sue then Sue, um,
Oh, mark touched on pmu
and I just wonder if, if there's an opportunity to use them.
'cause they've got this sort of focus now on public good
and sharing information
and they have got a significant issue with it.
So I think, I wonder if there's an opportunity to use them.
I'm sure there is. And because then there's also,
it's a bit like when you're talking about worm issues
and other things on farm, there's also um, a stigma
that comes with this that we,
'cause you want people to be not be afraid
to say that they've actually got it.
Yep. And to actually seek information
and seek assistance to get to get help.
Yeah. No, dead Right. And so,
And linking it back to Palm might help.
And, and the potential for financial, um, ramifications.
Someone says, I don't wanna buy your stock off
your farm. There's risk.
Oh. But there are ramifications anyway.
'cause I think said it was like a 40% reduction
in income. Yeah.
But, but further ramifications. Mm-hmm. So, um,
Yeah. Yeah. All your
Hay years ago the councils all had obnoxious
we inspector. That's right.
Yes. They would've done away within 89, I think.
Um, back to the future. Yeah. Maybe back to the future is
Is, yeah. I, I'm
not sure. I mean it's certainly true that,
that at the territorial level, like your local No, no.
Just weeds inspector that could in some cases be helpful,
but, but the territorial level is too fragmented.
You've gotta get a bigger area.
The region I think is the, is the right minimum level.
But even you really need to consider whether some
of the MPI needs to be in there more
providing even the coordination between regions.
'cause our report showed that the classification
of weeds differs between regional councils.
Mm-hmm. So you've got one trying to eradicate something
and another is trying to manage it.
Well, hold on. You know, there's a boundary line.
You can't have eradication on one side
and, and management on the other. So. Yeah.
And, and we've had that, um, bought before us
before where various, um,
councils had different classifications.
So half your property might be in one council
and half your property might be another.
Yes, yes. Different rules apply.
So I hope you will.
I mean we, even though our reports Space Invaders was about
the impact on Native ecosystems,
I think the things we said about the system remain, uh,
completely, uh, live.
So if you wanna take another look at that, um,
I think it would be useful.
And I think the government could still pick up some quite
useful recommendations there.
Happy to send across a copy. Yeah. Anyone wants it?
Yeah. Yeah. Thank you.
Yeah, the app if could send all the members
of the committee library,
It's on your library. Good.
Um, Right.
Yeah. So no, um, comments
to finish off with? No, no. I think
You want, you want to get onto the next one
and we're probably eating into time for that. Oh,
Well, we've done very well this morning,
so we have a little bit of extra
time at the end as well, so. Oh, good. Good,
Good. Okay. Um,
so, alright,
no further questions on the Madagascar Red War from anyone.
Very good. If we could move on to the next item
Well Just is, um,
Now I must ask you to look at the slides.
Not at me because there's a, there's a lot of, there's a lot
of bits and pieces moving around in the slideshow here.
So this has been something that's of particular interest
to the number of us Yes. For a number of years.
Well, any landowner, any landowner's interested,
I've looked at the maps on my farm
and they, they only make a certain
amount of sense, shall we say.
Mm-hmm. Um, look, I'd, I'd like to take you
through the findings of, um, my, one of my latest reports,
which is reviewing the use
of the LUC system in a regulatory context.
And that was published in December
and I've already had a chance
to brief the environment committee on this.
Uh, and I'm delighted that, that I think we actually,
we were trying to do it jointly and, and I was there.
You were there, okay. Yeah. Yeah, I was there.
So I'm gonna have a second, second crack. Okay.
It was that good. Was it? It was, there was, um,
I think they were trying to get a joint meeting
and it, we couldn't get the scheduling.
Yeah. So that's why I'm here separately.
Uh, let me start by outlining
what the land use capability, uh, system is.
LUC stands for Land Use Capability.
It's a land classification system,
which was developed in the 1950s,
and it was designed to support long-term sustained
production on the land.
Uh, LEC as many of you know, is made out
of eight classes, one to eight.
And within each of the classes, there are subclasses
based on the dominant limitation of productivity.
So it's only the dominant limitation.
There are four limitations.
There is, uh, erod ability, we soil and climate.
And then within the sub classes there are also units.
So it's got a certain level of disaggregation,
however, it was never designed to address environmental s
So the first question you might ask is, why review the use
of the LUC system?
Well, for a biological economy like ours,
high quality information about the land
and wider landscape is critical.
And it's also critical
for high quality environmental regulation.
Now, currently, the LUC systems being re relied on
to support three pieces of national regulation.
They are the policy statement for highly productive land,
the national environmental standard for commercial forestry
and the Climate Change Response Act
to limit ETS driven Farm to forestry conversion.
So those are the three current, uh,
regulatory uses of the system.
It, uc is also used in two regional regulatory plans in the
context of water quality and nutrient management.
Given that it wasn't designed
to address environmental management challenges,
but is now being used to support regulation,
I thought it was prudent to review whether the system was
sufficiently robust to support regulation
and particularly so given
that Parliament has a major new planning system in front
of it, in front of the environment committee
with these two bills planning and natural environment.
So the key finding of my review is that the LUC system
is ill suited to regulatory use.
This is due to several limitations.
The first one is that it's outdated.
This is because the main mapping was carried out about half
a century ago in the 1970s and eighties.
Not surprisingly, uh, things have moved since then.
That mapping remains unchanged.
It doesn't reflect the situation today.
For example, land management practices such as irrigation
and drainage directly affect the subclass
limitation of witness.
The addition of permanent irrigation can change the LUC unit
as the potential created by irrigation wasn't considered
during the original assessment in the 1970s
and 1980s Kennedy Plains.
Um, it's a good example of that at the time
of mapping manual technologies
and a high degree of expert judgment were used.
Now that was unavoidable,
but it introduced a high degree of subjectivity,
particularly into the boundaries between areas.
And it's not a criticism.
I mean, they did the very best job they could at the time.
It's just that we've moved on
and we've got new techniques for doing stuff.
Second limitation is the course scale
of the mapping ma,
which makes the the national LUC data set inappropriate
for use at a property scale.
And this is where most of us
who own land have immediately rushed to look at
what these lines mean.
And you know, your own farm inside out,
and then you look at what the line produces
and there seems to be a gap.
Well, that's scarcity surprising
because the scale of the LUC data set
is one 50,000.
So every centimeter on a map is 500 meters on the ground.
But to make operational
or site-based decisions, you need maps at the scale of one
to 5,000 or one to 10,000.
So that would be a centimeter on the map equaling 50
or uh, a hundred meters.
Um, it's as you, as some of you will know anyhow, that the,
the land can change much more frequently than at a
500 meter interval.
I, I can't resist telling you I've,
I missed snow from my own farm paddocks,
which move from being well drained to not so well draining.
It happens much more, uh, much more swiftly
and much more irregularly than the maps tell you.
I've, I've currently got a master student trying to work out
where ancient drainage channels lie under some
of my flat paddocks.
'cause that is actually
influencing what's going on at the top.
This is all out washed from the central
north island volcanoes.
But it's quite fascinating.
But what, what she's doing is very,
very fine grained what's happening on the surface doesn't
follow the course conclusions of LUC.
And that would be true everywhere.
It's not a criticism of LDC being done, you know that it's
what they could do at the time.
But we're, we're moving beyond there.
Now let me just outline how these limitations
play out in national regulations.
And I'll start with highly productive land.
Let's look at the tangible example from the Hawke's Bay
where the council explored different methods
to identify highly productive land.
Now the pink colors,
and you need to watch these slides just to understand this,
the pink colors on this map,
this is a bit of the Hawkes Bay.
You can see Hastings towards the top there.
Um, the pink colors show areas which are classed as one
to three under the LUC system.
So, uh, that's the rest of it is outside that.
Now the yellow colors on the right hand map
show the class one to three land
that show up when you are using an alternative map.
This is using smap, which is the digital soil map. Okay?
And as you could probably just see even with your eyes,
they don't match neatly.
Now the teal colored areas show the overlap between the two
and the overlap is just 41%.
So if you used one map, you'd get one set of results.
If you'd used another technique, sap, you get another.
And the LUC only overlaps with the more sophisticated
smap 41% of the time.
The rest doesn't. That's a very significant disagreement
between the dataset.
Similar analysis in Canterbury showed even lower agreement
of around 21%.
Now, the point is that you would need substantial ground
truthing to reconcile and validate the two.
You would be ill-advised to solely rely on either
of the methods for identification of highly productive land.
So in practical terms, if, if you were concerned
that being classed as highly productive could limit your
land use options, the lack
of overlap could spill real problems for you.
These are real regulatory problems caused
by inadequate underlying data.
Just look at the pink bits south of Hastings.
Um, the digital soil map doesn't give these a high status,
but the LUC map does
that cuts two ways depending on which side
of the coin you're on as to what you do with the land.
But, but it, it is a very significant difference. Okay.
The second illustration I've chosen of
how this LUC system plays out is in respect of the, uh,
national environmental standard on commercial forestry.
Uh, the, that standard has been, again,
derived from the LUC system, um,
using something called an erosion susceptibility
classification as a screening tool.
Uh, and that identifies the erosion susceptibility
of land intended for forestry.
So it's a threshold test used
to determine whether a forest activity is permitted
or subject to certain conditions being met
or whether it requires a resource consent outright.
So given that erosion from forestry activities is a key
environmental issue that the, the standard is supposed
to manage, identifying risky land is critical.
That relies on the rebut robustness
of the erosion classification
and the national, uh,
erosion susceptibility classification data set, which
as I say is based on, uh, LUC,
unfortunately, the ESC both over
and under classifies susceptibility of land to erosion,
obviously under classifying land
as a problem environmentally
because it gives the green light
to forestry when maybe more questions should be asked
and stricter controls imposed.
And you can see what people up in Tarara feel about that.
This just explore, um,
an example again from the Hawke's Bay.
So this, uh, map, uh, no, I'm gonna go back.
Um, so I don't distract you. Whoops.
This map shows three ESC zones.
This is erosion susceptibility classification, green
for low erosion susceptibility, orange
with high red with very high.
There is a fourth one, which is, uh, yellow for medium.
But there wasn't any medium on this bit that we chose.
Okay, so you got three of the four ESC zones there.
Um, and I just, you know, they're nice,
they're nice smooth lanes, aren't they?
No, the uniformity and the costes of these zones.
Um, and that just reflects the fact
that this data has been collected at one 50,000.
Okay, now look at the green zone on the second map.
This adds recent research from what used
to be called landcare research, which reveals
that this area contains high areas of, that are susceptible
to landslide and connectivity to waterways
that's shown in red.
So that lovely green bit on the top,
which we've said is low, it's riddled with red actually,
but, but that's
because we've come down to a much fine,
more fine-grained resolution.
So under classifying land as a risk
because of the more permissive approach
that the standard takes to management of that land.
And of course the same could apply the other way around.
You can find you being classified as high uh,
susceptibility, but in fact some of its green all comes back
to the underlying data.
On this third map, we added some additional information,
which came from Earth Sciences New Zealand.
And this shows areas with a greater than 80% probability
of rainfall induced landslides.
Again, it shows just how coarse the ESC zones are in
comparison with the recent research outputs.
So I think it shows the power
of newer finer resolution data.
The problem is that we don't have them everywhere.
It's a patchwork quilt.
The science system has funded RIS to do a bit here.
But there, um,
but we, this is something I think for a,
for a land-based economy in a country like New Zealand,
we should have this absolutely comprehensively.
So we, we can't always stitch information together in the
way that we've managed to do here for you.
There's bits of New Zealand where you couldn't do that.
So that brings me to, uh, my recommendations first
that as a result of the limitations I've outlined,
we shouldn't be using LUC for any more regulatory purposes.
It's two, two cores.
This, this recommendation applies both to national
and regional regulation through, uh,
uh, resource management plans.
The use of the national, uh, LUC data set
for property scale regulation is particularly problematic.
Secondly, the government should invest in progressively
improving essential contemporary data sets
that underpin land use regulation
and ensure that they're publicly available and affordable
and can be easily integrated.
I mean, there is a lot of information out there.
Um, taxpayers have paid for it,
but you may not be able to access it
or it may be expensive if you try.
Now as part of the review, um, we have in
identified several such data sets,
which we think should be made comprehensive as lidar,
which should all be familiar with.
We've got that over quite a lot
of the country, but not everywhere.
There's S map, which I think we've got to 70%
of productive soils.
Um, it still leaves 30% of them outside.
Um, does the land cover database now
that is based on remote sensing,
but it's only done every five and a half years or so.
Uh, and it's always a case of putting the hat around
and try to find agencies that will help fund it.
And then what we don't have at all,
but we should have, I'd have thought,
was real time land use mapping.
So we know actually what is happening on the
surface of the Earth now.
And you can see, I mean, that's valuable for anyone.
It's for, for absolutely anyone,
whether you are a developer, whether you're a council,
whether you're trying to write a spatial plan or whatever.
Knowing what's there now is pretty useful rather than having
to rely on bits and pieces of information
that may be out of day.
And by the way, that's what parliament looks like if
you use lidar.
There you are. Um, that's parliament, that's,
yeah, you, that's where we are now.
So what did you use? There we're in there. That's lidar.
Lidar. It's just, just, just using elevation.
Nothing else, but, but it's a, you know, it's,
it's very fine grain, doesn't it?
Um, so third recommendation.
Um, these essentially contemporary data
sets need to be used to modernize the LUC and ESC system.
So I'm not saying you throw them out, they were
for productive land purpose identification.
So you can modernize those by adding stuff
and where it's suitable.
You could create, uh, bespoke fit for purpose models for
specific regulatory purposes.
So you could imagine a world in which the government wants
to provide national direction on something
and they know they need information to do it.
They could say, these are the data sets that need to be used
and integrated to provide the information
base for regulating.
Of course, the databases have to be comprehensive.
If they're full of gaps, then it's garbage and garbage out.
Finally, we need to focus improvements in environmental data
and information, uh, on areas
where better information is most urgently needed.
Doing this stuff does cost money.
You don't try laboriously
to do it everywhere at all at the same times.
You've gotta focus on the hotspots.
I would've thought that focusing for some of these, say
for instance for the high productivity land one,
you'd focus your attention
where land is under pressure from urban expansion.
So the Aucklands, the tars, the Hamilton, Napier, Hastings,
Christchurch, those, it's the peri-urban situation
where you want extremely accurate data.
So, uh, to conclude the, the review highlighted
that the LDC system isn't fit
for purpose in a regulatory setting.
And the limitations of the system are yet another example
of a broader issue, which I keep drawing
to parliament's attention.
And that is the quality of our environmental information.
We need better environmental information.
It's the foundation of good decision making by you guys.
It's also the foundation of good economic choices
by people out there in the marketplace.
So this, it, it cuts both ways, both for an environmental
and an economic point of view.
This can only be a valuable investment
and I've been raising it now for eight years here.
Uh, secondly, the new resource management system proposes
to make greater use
of spatial regulation and environmental limits.
You're gonna need much better information if you want
that system to run, uh, properly.
Uh, so we need something of a step change, um, uh,
in information to, uh, power that, that's really more
for the environment committee.
Um, and I, but I said to them
that I thought their reform risks failing
if you don't make the investment that's needed, uh, in our
national data sets to underpin all it.
So thanks very much. Thank you
for giving me more than the 10 minutes you proposed.
But I really thought I should take you through
that full presentation.
Uh, 'cause it probably does answer some preliminary
questions and now you can dig in to the detail.
We'll go to Mike first and then to Steve.
'cause I've got a couple of this right. Um, you on too soon.
Where's all the that I've got?
Sorry, where's all The LA five?
I can't believe that there's only in that table on, uh,
There's very little, there's very little, there's
That amount of Five. It's,
it's always been the case. Yeah. Um, and I'm not, it
Has to do with the historical classification
criteria when they did it.
Uh, and how the criteria for
classifying the LUC file were kind of, uh, designed.
Maybe this is also the kind of, um, panel from
the US application
because the whole system came from
United States at the time.
And maybe this is to to do with that. It's
Just a quirk. It's always,
Yeah. And, and
then the, the other question is it,
and it's an observation as well,
and we've talked about this previously, is, you know,
with the luck classes, it is very blunt and very broad
and it doesn't take into account the,
the live changes that happen all the time.
No, exactly. It's a biological system. Yep, yep.
And it's not just irrigation, you know, bred north,
the bridge was Marino weather country back
in the day it was all riverbed.
Now there's six, eight inches of top soil. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
Um, it's completely different soil type mm-hmm.
Because of that investment.
And we see that on a hill country farms as well.
And people have, you know, talk about L six
and seven as unproductive.
Mm-hmm. It's far more productive than what it was 30
and 40 years ago due to fertilizer inputs,
rotational grazing, um, regenerative farming,
Steve. Um, but
That's literally No, no, that's right.
Doing that's, that's exactly right.
And it's far more productive and,
and it's evidenced by, um, our national lambing, uh,
percentage and live weight of lambs and all the rest of it.
Yeah. Yeah. You know, so,
and now you look at that system broadly or you know,
and it says that's unproductive.
Actually, that's not the case because it's evolved
and it will continue to evolve. Yeah.
This just hasn't kept up.
Yeah, that, that's really good point.
Steve, Have you hazarded any sort
of guess on what it would cost?
Oh,
No. No, I haven't.
And it's like anything else, it's as long
as a piece of string, Steve, because you can always add more
and it, there'll be diminishing returns.
Look, um, perhaps rather than speculate.
Now, let me tell you, I've got a report coming
to Parliament, um, around the middle of the year.
Um, so it's before you all go electioneering.
And it is, it is really pulling a lot of the stuff together
and looking at some of the technologies
that could be game changes.
Because you know, what they did back in the 1950s,
you know, there was a hell of a lot of
Bos on the ground having to go out and do stuff.
I mean, these days with remote sensing, uh, you can
just pick up gobs of information,
which they could not have done then.
So what what I'm gonna do is, is give Parliament an idea of
how some technologies could change the game.
Uh, so I'm, I'm, that's gonna be my last pitch on this.
Uh, you know, after almost a decade of making this point,
I mean, someone has to pick this up.
My advice to the government to,
to governments has been you should establish a task force.
You need to give leadership to a single agency.
It could be Lins, it could be MFE, it could be statistics,
but a, a data based entity.
Yeah. You know, know leadership.
Sit down, look at the array of data sets, look at
where the gaps are, look at
what could be integrated in what order.
Look at the technologies
that could move you forward faster in the
places that need it most.
And then develop a plan over, say a decade to try
to change the game.
But you will never do this
unless you actually decide
that you're gonna do it in a systemic way.
Can I, can I just jump in there?
Um, and this is a point we've made to the environment, so
that committee in the context of R RM reform,
but yes, there is an upfront cost to the crown of this.
Uh, but there's long-term savings
for New Zealand Inc as well.
You know, re people putting in resource contents are
spending millions of dollars in some cases.
Yeah. And, and it's incredibly expensive.
And, and making this upfront investment will
make that process cheaper.
You know, you're moving to a more permissive system.
Make, there will be an upfront cost to this investment,
but we have to think about how we claw this back
with small charges on, on all of these new permitted uses
or, or, or, or consents that exist under the new system
to be able to recover that investment over time. Uh,
So sorry, what do you mean by that?
What do you mean by the callback?
Well, because, you know, the, the crown will need
to spend money up front on this.
Yeah. But people are gonna be saving money in the cost
of putting in consents under the new system.
They'll be saving a lot of money
because a lot of the information they've previously had
to go to the pros and procure will be provided for them.
Right. Oh, yeah. Okay. See, it'll be free.
So instead of paying $20,000 to, to a soil scientist
to get you consent, that will, that will,
will be covered under this.
Well, the government is talking about, you know,
cost recovery for that system, which is entirely fair.
But if the cost recovery is part of a system,
which is dramatically reducing the costs over time,
then it's a no brainer.
I mean, look, I about you.
This is what I thought that one of the core functions
of governments, actually, this is
before you start spending no money
on consumption and other items.
This is a core investment any government
of any political color should be
committing to make. That's what
They knew in the fifties.
Yes, yes, yes. They did actually know that in the 1950s.
That was the state of the art then. Yeah.
That was the state of the art then.
It's just that we haven't kept the state of the art up.
So there's a couple of subs from Sues, and then
Oh, in terms of the measurement, like it's
because you could measure irrigated land,
but that's actually different to,
so you've got sand country for example.
Yeah, sure. And it's one class
of land when it's just raw sand country.
But then once you've put
irrigation on it, it's a different class.
So how do you, how do you sort of rationalize that?
Is it the latest, is this the
latest thing when you measure it? But,
But then, Or, or that doesn't change it.
It's not, doesn't change.
The, is the luck doesn't change no matter what you add to
It. No, the luck doesn't change. Right.
So
It's the, it's what's underneath we
We're gonna get beyond this, you know, we, yeah.
We can't think about this as a single data platform. Yeah.
Where there's just one,
there's one index that tells you everything.
This is layers of information. Yeah.
So, you know, LUC will be in there. It's always been there.
It provides a purpose. But then you can
overlay that with soil.
You can overlay that with climate.
You know, you can overlay that with, with any number.
I mean, when we did our work for going
with the grain in Southland, we, the, the, the,
the person we were working with, uhlin Risman,
his data layers, the,
the 14 different data layers he was using,
and he was integrating 14 layers to say,
these are the leakier areas, these are the less leaky areas,
you know, in terms of nutrients and so on.
So it, it was much, much more fine grain.
So you've gotta think about it as multiple data sets
that then you assemble on a bespoke basis
for the purpose in hand.
So when the government wanted to do what it did with, with,
with a forestry, um, it would've actually gone out there
and used the accurate data layers, which made sense.
They'd have been about slope.
They'd have been about, you know, the landslide potential.
They, they'd have been about productivity. Yeah.
That's part of it. Uh,
probably wind direction, all sorts of things.
You could put all of that together
and say, okay, these are the areas
where we don't want to see forestry.
So a consistent approach.
And then the only other thing I was gonna say was that, um,
when you talk, I totally agree
with you on reducing the 500 meter down to 50 meters,
but the technology's there now.
Like I know when we applying fertilizer Yeah.
You know, you could, they can modify it. Yes.
One meter and one meter square blocks. Yes.
They put more on here and less on here. Yeah. So that,
Yeah. It's just, it
is a question of just, it's more data. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. No, quite. So thank
You. And, uh, more recent,
uh, data sets
that we've showed in terms of the erosion ones, those, uh,
highly susceptible land
and the connectivity to
what ways they all are high resolution.
So not one to, uh, one to 500 meters,
but one to 50,000 or like 50 meters.
One to 50 meters. Yeah. Not one to 500.
Yeah. One to 50. Yeah. 50.
But what Susie's saying is, in fact, yeah, you,
you can go below that.
It's just a question of how much data you want
to gather to analyze. Yeah. You
Can get a tractor to put fertilizer on your
pad and one meter block.
So it needs a bit more there, less there.
Yep. Yep, yep, yep. So you got supplement lifetime,
you know, actually as you put fertilizer on
or you go from, um, un irrigated to irrigated,
it just changes, you know, it's lifetime
that continually evolves, couldn't you?
Um, I just had a question around, um, you had, um, you know,
the detail in the Hawke's failure.
Yeah. Have you got a sense of the percentage of New Zealand
where all that information is actually available to be,
be able to do what you
Did? Well, dataset
by dataset, we know, I don't, I haven't,
we haven't put them all together to see what you'd know,
but certainly for Smap, which was the more sophisticated
of the two that, as I said, it's 70% of productive land.
Do you know what the lidar numbers
Are? Uh,
no. But they're, uh, it's probably slightly higher.
It's even higher. But there are really gaps
for wider. Yeah, we saw
That. We saw that when we
did a review of
that LA was it last year?
Remember it had the gaps around certain
Yeah. Uh, around
two. Uh,
You're in the back spot. I know. Yeah.
I, and then field one,
these are gaps. That's why I remember it.
Yes. And, and I mean, yes, field one's important,
but if you were prioritizing, you know, it's
where you're under the greatest
pressure, the greatest stress. That's where you put
We target F1, then maybe the,
But on, um, highly productive land.
So in terms of the methodology where we essentially,
the ministry for the environment currently has a project,
and we mentioned it in the report, uh,
they essentially commissioned BSI to produce that layer of
what could be highly productive.
And basically those maps from a haws
bay that we've showed mm-hmm.
And they're trying to do it for all of the areas where
there is this smap coverage, uh, at least.
And with the idea that that will inform identification
of highly productive land.
Obviously that doesn't work in terms of erosion
because there are gaps there.
But on the flat land, we essentially smap covers that,
and that's like 70% of that highly productive land.
That's kind of the idea.
So the equivalence of the those ho bay maps,
they're currently being worked through by feet for
a larger area of the country. We're
Not starting from nowhere. That mean
that's the good news. We are not starting from
nowhere is a question of having a commitment.
Yeah. To pick up what we've got, integrate it into a,
into a, an integrated architecture.
That that's the, that's the policy decision that's missing.
Steve, why wouldn't you do it? You can't brainer.
Um, my question is, are you across the government's decision
to take LC three out of the national policy statement on,
on highly productive land so
that it's no longer protected from
urban sprawl and development?
Yeah. That the cabinet decision in December last year?
No, no, I'm not. And but part of the, uh, context
of it is they express an intention.
I don't have the document in front of me, um,
to do a more thorough analysis of the C3.
Um, and before they determine which bits of it, uh,
should really be protected, I just wonder if that could be a
specific, um, opportunity to, um, apply some
of what you've deduced as the problem. Um, it could
Be, and it, it could be my, my, my instinct is
that we don't want to keep, keep getting distracted by,
oh dear, we've got a regulatory issue.
Let's specifically say, well, we can work on here. Yeah.
There is a bigger prize here. Yes.
Um, because, you know, e look, so the government,
suppose it looks at L three,
you can bet there'll be some LUC two of which isn't L two.
Of course. Yeah. I mean, mean where
somebody's disadvantaged.
Yeah. IIII actually think the big prize is to work on trying
to sort this out more systemically. Yeah.
And probably more, again, like picking up on
that last recommendation recommendation for
that's really more targeted patient gathering,
IE greater mapping in the areas of pressure.
Yeah. I, uh, in there there's going to be the interactions
of LEC, especially two and three,
but say take the, um, nap hes area that's, uh, been shown
or other urban
and sprawling centers that's kind of
focus will be more on that.
And it makes sense to sort of
do more granular mapping there, uh,
not just focus on one specific.
Yeah. So, um, no, you go,
because you would want as many layers as possible.
Yes. Yeah. Because an example from, um, where I'm from, um,
there's an orchard that's been built out around,
and they cannot, because of reverse sensitivity,
they cannot operate, um, profitably as they used to
because they've, they're not allowed to use the sprays or,
or what have you.
People complain about the noise,
but they can't subdivide either.
No. This is, this is a, a, a, a really serious problem.
Uh, I mean, councils again,
I I think this pervades everything.
You end up drawing lines on maps. Yeah.
And I, I don't blame councils.
They, they use what information they've got.
Um, uh, you know,
and I, I, I see this in, in, in my own case, you know,
that well, it, it's, it's class this, um,
and to which I say, well actually, look, you,
you could easily be, be rid of that
because it's, it's, that's clearly not in there,
but that's not what the information says.
Councils. It's too complicated
and expensive then to start picking and choosing.
So you, you end up
with the lowest common denominator in a way.
So, you know, in, in your case, I'd, I'd have said that,
that, that, that's just a no brainer to get that right.
Oh, but that's probably there, there, to be honest with you,
I don't think you're probably up
against information problems.
You just up against sub divisional rules. Yeah.
Which no longer makes sense.
If it's completely surrounded by houses, then well
Can't The Business and
unfortunate trying to have reclassification,
but they haven't got, they won't,
they haven't got there at all. So it's, but
Unfortunate, I mean the government's proposed reform,
I think in this respect is potentially a good one.
Spatial planning, which says, look,
if we're gonna have urban growth, then
what directions it gonna go into?
What, what density? And you can identify the areas
that you want to keep free of housing, either
because it's very, very highly productive
and there's reverse sensitivity and or
because this hazard risk, you know, from floodplain, all
of this stuff, you, I think that that's a really good idea.
It's not a new idea.
It's, it's being done already in parts of New Zealand,
but doing that comprehensively makes a lot of sense.
But to do it well, and where you get into trouble is
where somebody comes along
and says, we've just decided this is the 27
growth limit line.
And you think, hold it, you've just included my place.
And, and it's got none of those characteristics.
But they say, well, that's what the,
that's what the data says.
You see. So if you wanna make this work in a way
that people will be, will accept, okay,
gotta be some trade offs, there'll be some areas
where you can, and some areas where you can't,
you can at least they won't agree on everything,
but at least if the information
tells the same story, they'll go with it.
But it's where people find that a massive gap
between their lived experience
and what, what some data set from the past said.
So, um, I just, on the other hand,
I guess I was just thinking that like,
could you also use this to, um,
increase the productivity of some land?
Because you could say, right, we've got some land here,
but without any environmental damage.
Like it doesn't need too much water,
or it doesn't need this, that you could actually increase
the productivity of land.
So you could determine other bits of land
that we aren't using necessarily for food production
that could be brought into
The No, no, that, that's equation, that's very much
what we were, were trying to say with, with,
with going with the grain.
That you need to look at this at the level of catchments
and you need to identify the most at risk areas,
and that's where you need to spend your money.
Now the flip side of that is there are areas
where it doesn't make sense to be spending money
or restricting production in the same way.
So you end up with a much, much more sophisticated,
but it's all gonna add up.
At the end of the day, let's be honest.
Uh, what ends up at the river at the bottom
and goes into the estuary, the quality of that, you know,
there's only a certain amount of carrying capacity,
but currently I don't think we are using our,
our carrying capacity well
because of the coarseness of that information.
So rules are hurting some people more than they need to,
and they're not tough enough for others. Yeah.
No, that's great. Thank you very much Steve.
Thank you for your presentation.
So the three pieces of legislation that currently rely on,
you know, you see mm-hmm.
Um, I mean, how problematic is that from a
efficacy point of view and also a fairness point of view,
and therefore if we're gonna keep passing pieces
of legislation that use ruc, isn't this, isn't there a sort
of critical urgency around
This? Yes, yes. I think there
is. I mean, it is very unfair
to people who have had land, which for the purposes
of the regulation is, I don't say misclassified.
It's, it's classified for the purposes of NEC,
but it isn't classified for the purposes of regulation.
It's extremely unfair. Mm-hmm.
Um, so yeah, there's a real urgency.
I, I should remind you, I'm not sure whether we came
to this committee, whether there was an environment,
but we warned the house, we warned the government,
we said when they were trying to restrict forestry, uh, uh,
on, on, on, on classic seven land, we warned 'em
of the dangers, uh, here, but it wasn't good enough.
Be much better to amend the ETS, but that's another matter.
Yeah. No, any further questions.
So, um, thanks Simon. I, I, real pleasure. Awesome.
Uh, catchment group, um, did a BE project Oh yeah.
A while back using lidar
and we were going down three meters into the soil
and that information was really, really useful.
Um, 'cause what we were doing the ground in the, on, uh,
pilot scheme in one area, what we thought was,
you know, the standard operating procedure for, um,
environmental, um, stuff
turned out we spent, uh, 200,000
or something dollars planting and blah, blah.
And we would've been better off spending a fraction of
that just putting a, a few buns in, along
a intermittent waterway.
And that would've given us right.
Far better result than,
and we only found that out when we did the LIDAR stuff.
Well, that, that's ground penetrating
radar to go down below.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. I've seen this in, in,
I think it's Susie's area
where people have u been using buns in ephemeral waterways
and that was all based on very sophisticated
soil mapping, wasn't it?
Mm-hmm. In an area where there wasn't soil map.
So they, they had, they got Massey
and they got egg research to go into all of this work
for a quite small area because there was a gap.
And, and I, they were very proud to show it off to me
and I said, look, this is really great,
but what about the poor guy
who owns the farm over the fence?
Because the information was literally just
for experimental, you know?
Yeah. Well, uh, yeah,
but it's fascinating that technologies
that are available lead you to make better
Decisions. Yeah, yeah.
And what's more ous, pe I mean,
you'll know this from catchment groups.
You give people this information and they're fascinated.
Yeah. I mean, it really is, it's a real hook
to get people interested in managing the land better.
Oh. Uh, you know, they do it, they want to do it right,
but it's difficult about the
Right information.
No. You know, they're environmentally focused. Well, well,
And let's be honest, uh, many are,
and not everybody, I,
there are some people that don't wanna
know anything. People
Catchment groups Are Yeah.
But catchment groups. I agree. Absolutely.
Alright, we much hope you can help push this forward
because we've been campaigning on this one on information
for a long time, and I think it's something which Parliament
as a whole should be able to agree on.
Yeah. Well, we, we do,
we'll make a recommendation right now, won't we?
Look, um, we're maybe we should write a letter. Yeah.
We've, we've certainly, um, all got interest in this.
Yeah, yeah. Obviously, which is why we had you to come in.
Well, thank you very, thank you very much. Come.
Thank you so much. Thank you all.